The gift
THE PAULISTA MUSEUM, created 110 years ago, better known as
Museu do Ipiranga, Museu da Independência, has been an organ of
integration linked to the Dean of Culture and University Extension – PRCEU/
USP, with “scientific, cultural and educational responsibilities in the field of
History of Material Culture in Brazilian Society”1. It consists of two museums,
in two cities: one in São Paulo, in the Ipiranga neighborhood, and another in Itu, the
Republican Museum “Itu Convention”. Like any other cultural institution
long-lived, it was transformed and adapted to the circumstances of the moment.
The first Brazilian museum was the National Museum, founded in 1817.
All others are republican creations. The one located in São Paulo is one of the
four oldest in the country, and the one in Itu, from 1921, precedes the Historical Museum
Nacional, dating from 1922. Overall, it is one of the most visited by the population,
with around 300,000 visitors/year. In 2003, the total area is 8,675.18 m2,
in four buildings, in the cities of São Paulo and Itu – insufficient space for the
technical reserves, laboratories and other services. More than 110 servers form
the functional body: professors, researchers, specialists (in libraries, in the
object service, in the conservation and restoration laboratory, educational service,
museography), museum technicians, photographers, administrative staff – group
small in the face of institutional needs.
Over time, the buildings underwent transformations.
architectural features, internal modifications, necessary adaptations for the new
usage programs, with decorations placed or changed; the collection was diverse
times divided and rearranged; the environment was totally changed by the growth
1. Art. 1, Resolution 4,393/
97 - Museum Rules
Paulista, DOE, 14 May 1997.
urban, for the transformations in the means of transport and in the construction techniques;
environmental and climatic conditions have changed; the ways of working the
collection have been modified several times. Water and power were installed
posteriorly; increasingly complex electrical networks were spreading
by the buildings; telephone systems were being placed and replaced by
others increasingly complex; fire prevention systems; systems
security against intrusion and damage to the exposed collection; control devices
of temperature and humidity; and computer network cables run through the buildings
from top to bottom.
the known past
The museum's main building is located in the city of São Paulo: the
Ipiranga Monument was erected in 1885 to commemorate the
Independence and the Empire, an initiative of conservative politicians with the
Pedro II's approval, with funds coming from a lottery system.
After years of proposals and debates in the Provincial Assembly, the
project by architect-engineer Tommaso Gaudenzio Bezzi, who was also
superintendent of the work, carried out by the architect-contractor Luigi Pucci – a
architectural monument, a palace in the shape of a lying E, built in
an area still sparsely inhabited, facing the North, towards the central area of
city, which was the most populated.
The initial project was dwarfed in its physical dimensions by the complex
economic situation of the final years of the Empire, and with the Proclamation of
Republic in 1889, was considered completed, without the dimensions and
planned finishes.
The purpose that the monument, designed to be a
Independence commemorative space, with the painting by Pedro Américo, was very
discussed by republican politicians from São Paulo. The option was to give scientific purpose
to space: the Museum of the State of São Paulo was already formed, dating from
1891, with the collection of the Sertório Museum, the Pessanha and Ramalho collections and the
collection of the Geographical and Geological Commission. In 1892, the state government
republican declared the Monumento do Ipiranga and its dependencies as “proper
of the State”2. The Museu Paulista was created in 1893, when the president of
Bernardino de Campos State defined the scientific and cultural function for the building
– to be the first public museum in the State of São Paulo, collecting the
collections and objects under the custody of the State Geographic and Geological Commission3,
with the reorganization of the State Museum4. It started as a 19th century museum,
encyclopedic, centered on Natural History, with some items on National History,
and so it remained for some decades5.
The transformation into a museum of national and São Paulo history began
in the administration of Afonso de Escragnolle Taunay, between 1917 and 1945, who reorganized
for the commemorations of the 1st Centenary of Independence, in 1922, giving
finishing what was still provisional and decorating it internally with paintings,
portraits, sculptures and historical objects, a task developed for the most part
between the years 1917 and 1937.
2. Law no. 46, of 25 of
August 1892.
3. Law no. 192, of 26 of
August 1893.
4. Law no. 200, of 29 of
August 1893.
5. See Alfonso de E.
taunay. commemoration of
Fifth anniversary of the solemn
museum institution
Paulista at the Palace of
Ipiranga. São Paulo: Official State Press,
1946.
And it was up to him to create the annex, the Republican Museum “Convenção de
Itu”, in the city of Itu, commemorating republican activities6, which is
installed in a rammed earth house, a family residence of farmers in the
café, adapted in the 20th century for use as a museum, in the area
city ​​center, next to the Candelária Church. The usage program
internal decoration, the tiles, the collection units, the portraits of the
Conventions were the director's decisions.
The Museu Paulista, as a scientific institution, was the matrix of others: in
1925, the Botany section was transferred to the Biological Institute; in 1939, the section
of Zoology was attached to the Department of Zoology of the State of São
Paulo, today Museum of Zoology/USP; the Mineralogy section went to the current
Institute of Geosciences/USP; paintings were transferred to the collection of
Pinacoteca do Estado/State Secretariat of Culture/SP. Collection items
have been relocated over the years to other museological institutions,
also belonging to the government of the State of São Paulo, or linked in some way.
way to him. 🇧🇷
From its early days it had the characteristic of being a museum with
strong performance in scientific research - either by specialized staff
contracted, either for the activity of collecting and studying the material obtained, or for
by publications, such as Revista do Museu Paulista –, which remained and
accentuated with the integration to the University of São Paulo7.
After 1989, with the separation of the anthropological collections,
archaeological and ethnographic8, its profile as a Museum of the History of Material Culture
of Brazilian society was defined, either by the collection or by the conceptualization
of areas of activity and lines of research - Society and Daily Life, History
of the Imaginary and Universe of Work.
In addition to being a scientific institution for research and production of
knowledge, and as such obliged to disseminate the results obtained, under
various forms and specifically in the museological way, the Museu Paulista has a
characteristic that makes it different from the other museums of the University
of São Paulo and the city – that of being a component element of the imaginary
social paulista and national.
a national icon
Icon: “...an emblematic thing of its time, of its group, in a
to act and think; image, portrait, mirror image, simulacrum,
ghost, spirit image, likeness; image, mental representation,
portrait..."9.
The Museum, throughout these one hundred and ten years of existence and activity,
became a Monument to Independence located in the city of São
Paulo, or from a monument to the republican movement in Itu, into a national icon, in
sense of being emblematic of national history in two moments of connotation
politics, which are landmarks of identity – Independence and Republic – and we can
today consider it an “authorized” source of the elements of historical visual representation.
of Brazilian society and its historical memory10.
6. Law no. 1,856, of 29
December 1921, inaugurated on April 18,
1923.
7. State Law No. 7,843,
of 03.11.1963.
8. Resolution 3,560 of
1989.
9. Cf Houaiss Dictionary
of the Portuguese language.
Rio de Janeiro: Objective,
2001, p. 1562.
10. The national museum in
strict sense is the Museum
National History. Although he and the Imperial Museum of Petrópolis have
more numerous collections
and varied, the Museum
Paulista has been the favorite and the reference for
the image request
for graphic illustration purposes by publishers
commercial and university students and by researchers.
Its textual and cartographic documentation is an integral part of the
works of São Paulo and national historiography. Iconography – watercolors, paintings,
portraits, photographs, maps, plants, and also the objects of its collection –
sculptures, coins, medals, porcelain, clothing, armory, instruments
of work, furniture were transformed into social memory: they are recurrent
not only in didactic, paradidactic and specialized books on the History of the
Brazil, History of São Paulo and History of Art, but also in albums,
postcards, artistic and tourist promotion books. The printed images
are published in thousands of copies/year, in such a way that for many
of Brazilians who study and have access to school books, the past
materialized is deposited in it.
Mass communication vehicles also explore the
monumentality of the buildings and the collection due to the apparent ease of reading the
historical narrative built on them. Publicity by the media, mainly by
television, reaches millions of viewers, who identify their images with the
landmark dates of the official history of the State, with the national memory, the
national. The systematic visitation of students – from preschool to university students; in
national and foreign tourists and various social groups delimited by age,
conditionsocial action, special needs; and common visitors, in family groups,
confirms its role in the social imaginary and its cultural importance.
The Museu Paulista – the buildings, the collections, the intentions of its directors
– has been the subject of several and numerous studies, dating back to the
start-up times and indicate the various possible readings at any given time.
historic; in the same way, and according to the historiographical proposals
in force, items from its collection have deserved greater or lesser attention from specialists,
from textual to iconographic documents, from political texts to objects of use
everyday life11.
The built Museum presents itself and remains the place of fountains
documentary and material evidence of a somewhat mythologized past.
It is recognized today that the very structuring of the Museu Paulista
as a museum of national and São Paulo history, held in the 1920s and
30 of the 20th century, was intended to transform it into a space for
representation of the historical imaginary of a certain social group, which
was presented as if it were that of the whole society. task that was completed
success, and that for the future and vitality of the institution it is essential that
critically read and overcome.
the construction of the past
Afonso de Escragnolle Taunay was an engineer trained in Rio de Janeiro,
who came to São Paulo to be a professor at the Polytechnic School and became
director of a Natural History Museum. He was recognized as a historian before
of its most significant production, a common fact in some spheres of activity
intellectual at the time (GUIMARÃES, 1999), and became one of them in everyday practice
and specialized in São Paulo and São Paulo history. As a renowned author, he has
numerous production and considerable critical fortune (ELLIS and HORCH, 1977; MATOS,
1977; RODRIGUES, 1958 and 1977). He was responsible for structuring the Museum as
11. Production is very
numerous, but in the last
decade were carried out
the following studies: Pau lo Cavalcante Oliveira
Junior. Alfonso d'E. taunay
and the construction of the Bandeirante memory. River
January, 1994. Master's
in History/ICS/UFRJ;
Maria Jose Elias. Museum
Paulista: memory and history. Sao Paulo, 1996. I major in Social History/
FFLCH/USP; Ana Maria de
Alencar Alves. a museum
scientist in the history of
São Paulo: the Museum of
Ipiranga. Sao Paulo, 1998.
Master in Social History/FFLCH/USP; Ana Clau dia Fonseca Brefe. A place of memory for the
nation: the Paulista Museum
reinvented by Affonso
d'Escragnolle Taunay
(1917-1945). Campinas /
SP, 1999. Doctorate in
History/IFCS/UNICAMP.;
José Costa de Oliveira Son. The Museum building
Paulista: a bit of the history of Bezzi's monument-building. São Paulo, 2000. Master in Social History/FFLCH/USP;
Cecilia Helena de Salles
Oliveira. the spectacle of
Ypiranga: mediations between history and memory. Are
Paulo, 2000. Free Teaching. Paulista Museum /
USP; Miyoko Makino. THE
construction of national identity: Afonso de E.
Taunay and the decoration of the
Paulista Museum (1917-
1937). Sao Paulo, 2003.
Doctorate in History
Social/FFLCH/USP.
a museum of national and São Paulo history, giving it his conception of
history and perception of society.
He was a descendant of a titled family, monarchist, transformed
by the contingencies in a State servant in the Weberian sense,
apparently indifferent to local and national political conjunctures, but with
social and cultural capital, and sufficient political skill to move between
diverse groups that successively disputed and assumed the political domain
of the State and the Republic for almost thirty years. He was an intellectual in the service of the
State, like so many others in the first half of the 20th century, preceding the
phase of specialized professional training (MACHADO NETO, 1973; MICELI,
1979).
The construction of the national icon – with the textual documentary selection,
cartographic, sculptural, architectural, iconographic and landscape
over the years, embodied a historiographical narrative, visible to visitors, which
can be read clearly in some elements, and that still has aspects
obscure in others.
An impressionist formulation is that as the landmark was the
National independence, point of origin and justification of the monument, the structuring of the collection and the exhibition area all converge to give meaning
and shine at the given moment – ​​defined as a revealing moment of
political importance of São Paulo. In the case of Itu, the focus is the Republic, the
republican movement in São Paulo and the First Republic, period of predominance
politician of the São Paulo oligarchy.
the past built
The systematic performance of in-depth historiographical analyzes is
fundamental for the reflection on the meaning of the history produced and constructed,
visual narrative, materialized, for the critical overcoming of the elements
consensual and known values ​​of the heroic past of colonization,
the struggles for independence, the construction of the imperial state, andhi from the state
republican as the exclusive work of a certain social group – a memory
social structure built from a conservative perspective.
In the last quarter of the 20th century, with the transformations of knowledge
history in the Western European tradition, expanding the possibilities of work
of historians and with the introduction of the concepts of “invention of traditions”,
“social memory” and “historical representation” is that more critical analyzes
made possible.
The studies carried out on the construction of national memory
initially highlighted the relationship with post-French Revolution needs
of relationship between rulers and ruled and the republican form of
government (NORA, 1984; CARVALHO, 1990).
At the same time, the “invention of tradition” and the “representation
“historical” came to be recognized as historical construction and possible objects
analysis, for the knowledge and understanding of society or the group
and the needs that gave rise to them (HOBSBAWM and RANGER, 1984;
BANN, 1994).
A recent study on Afonso de Escragnolle Taunay emphasizes less the
republicanism and more the conservative relationship with society, religion and
State (ARAÚJO, 2003).
Taunay's conservative features may be an explanation for the
tense relationship with the University of São Paulo, and the inclusion of the Museum among the
complementary institutes, when they were created in 1934. It can also be
an understandable reaction of rejection in the face of the new, in the face of a proposal
of an extremely vocal and militant political group, endowed with power of influence,
even politically defeated (CARDOSO, 1982). And it can also be
fear, in opposition to the Faculty of Philosophy, Sciences and Letters – a school
new, professionalizing with areas that until then were personal options or
as a result of social and cultural capital, favorite place for reformist republicans
and young radicals, influenced by French professors who brought other
social analysis proposals (CAPELATO et al., 1994).
His intellectual career was carried out in academic institutions
traditional, national and São Paulo, such as the Brazilian Historical and Geographical Institute,
the Historical and Geographical Institute of São Paulo, Brazilian Academy of Letters and
Academy of Letters of São Paulo (FERREIRA, 2002).
In terms proposed in some recent cultural studies, the
concern for national identity is almost always understood as
a proposal for a homogeneous society, which arises from a mythical past,
prepared by a social layer for society, which reads the country for a
non-existent past and excludes regional differences and peculiarities in favor of
a homogeneous, eternal and comprehensive whole.
The question of national identity, which until recently was thought
only as a need of the Nation-State to create ties of relationship and
dependence on the population, therefore, a notion generated and guided by the
most influential political groups, can be read, in some situations, as a
proposal of politically defeated groups, holders of social and cultural capital,
but marginal to the dominant political groups, which resort to debates in the
cultural field to maintain, preserve and try to impose their ideas, creating spaces
cultural action and personnel training, with the aim of disseminating and strengthening
their proposals successfully (LEBOVICS, 1994).
Taunay's performance, as director of a museum that was being
transformed into a historical museum, can be identified with that of conservatism
from the beginning of the Republic, almost a continuity of the Empire. Such positioning
was used by many monarchists who chose to join the new regime,
forced by contingencies. The action in the materialization of the national past,
via the creation of paintings, portraits, sculptures and “recovered” objects, indicates a
different way of acting of the historian, practically opposite to the posture that appears
in written works, which are rigorously and almost literally
supported by the documents consulted.
In the museographic narrative there is the appreciation and search for identity
nationality, from the point of view of the civilized domination over the savage, and in the relationship of the
Portuguese colonizer with friendly indigenous populations, with the mediation
of the Church. This is referred to as missionary for both groups, and highlighted in
different moments of the construction of the narrative, either in a visible way or in a
implicit way, in the iconography commissioned.12
12. See Old Saint Paul:
a modern order. Video. São Paulo: Museu Paulista/USP,
1995.; Vânia C. de Carvalho and Solange Ferraz de
Lime. old São Paulo
a commission from modernity: the photographs
of Militão in the paintings of the
Paulista Museum. Annals of
Paulista Museum – History and Material Culture,
new series, v.1, p.147-178,
1993.
the hidden past
Taunay worked with the notion of homogeneous national identity,
resulting from the success of Portuguese colonization, which continued in the
– notion developed and imposed by the Instituto Histórico e Geográfico BrasileirO
(GUIMARÃES M. L., 1988 and 1989; GUIMARÃES L., 1999; GLEZER, 2002).
In his activity as a museum director, creating and materializing
elements of the past, the strong and declared influence of Capistrano does not appear
de Abreu, who in his works proposed the innovative analysis of colonization
Portuguese in Brazil with the notion of an archipelago, isolated islands, with customs
differentiated, resulting from the spatial and political isolation, a proof
of the failure of the colonizing project13, an issue that became a reference for the
most significant authors of the generation of 30 and beyond.
The narrated history and the society portrayed in the Museu Paulista are the
that we today call exclusionary and concealment: the past is harmonious,
since the beginning of colonization, with Portuguese and Indians working together,
under the aegis of the Church; the aforementioned struggles – against the Dutch and the revolts of
1720, 1789 and 1817 are steps towards the autonomy and independence of the
Empire. The quotes from the wars of independence are punctual, highlighting
heroes, the political debate and the Portuguese surrender. In Itu, on the tiles, white and
Indians side by side, in the exploration of the territory, in the economic activities, the
economic development in the Empire, the figure of the second emperor and the
republican movement.
According to the historian himself, at the Museu Paulista he worked:
Looking to worship the great events of national life or to celebrate the
of illustrious Brazilians, the Museu Paulista offers its visitors the opportunity to examine
extensive exhibitions evoking these great achievements and our famous compatriots.
We started by making such exhibitions in 1922 on the occasion of the 1st Centenary of the
National Independence. We then celebrated the fourth centenary of the beginning of the
settlement of Brazil, the birth of Anchieta, etc. Among many others
celebrations held lately should be remembered those of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Lei Áurea and the Proclamation of the Republic, that of the Christmas centenaries of Campos
Salles, Prudente de Moraes, Bernardino de Campos, Diogo Antonio Feijó and, there are still
few months, from the Barão do Rio Branco, in addition to others, tributes born from
several opportunities like the one we consecrated to Caxias14.
And in the Republican Museum “Convenção de Itu”:
This Museum started very small... But as its
gallery of portraits, antique furniture and various pieces, the affluence of the
public... [and the same thing happened] ... when starting and continuing with the tiling service
from the building's vast lobby, through large panels evoking historic scenes
locations, or reproducing old urban and regional aspects or even medallions
with portraits of prominent Ituanos on the national, São Paulo and local scene.15
None of the causes of the transformations resulting from conflicts
economic, social and cultural aspects that marked the Brazilian social formation is
presented, although Brazilian and São Paulo society have gone through
profound and numerous changes in the last quarter of the 19th century, especially
in its final years and until the first half of the 20th century. Such changes do not
are made explicit or remembered: either those from the world of work, with the end of
13. Cf Capistrano de
Abreu. Three centuries later. In: - Chapters of
Colonial History. 3rd
🇧🇷 ed.
Rio de Janeiro: Civilization
Brazilian, 1987.
14. Afonso de E. Taunay.
Commemoration of the 5th anniversary of the solemn institution of the Paulist Museum at the Palácio do Ipi ranga. São Paulo: Official State Press, 1946,
P. 38. Transcription without
modernization.
15. Idem, p. 39.
slavery and the domain of free labor; either the process of urbanization, or that of
industrialization; there are no social transformations like the emergence of layers
urban averages, nor the social conflicts inherent to the processes of transformation.
There is no reference to demographic changes in the country and in the city,
that were already visible in the third and fourth decades of the twentieth century. made the valuation
of the colonial world – in the paintings and in the model of the city of 1841, when this
had about 20,000 inhabitants, before the changes brought to the city by the
expansion of coffee plantations in the Province.
DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
YEAR BRAZIL State São Paulo City São Paulo
190016 17,984,000 2,282,279 239,820
1920 30,635,600 4,592,188 579,033
1940 41,165,280 7,180,316 1,326,261
In the same way that the creation of the Museu Paulista dates from the beginning
of the republican period, the city of São Paulo, in urban growth
following the population growth, it was a city of construction
republican, with the industrialization process in full swing, with
changes in the ethnic and cultural composition of the population – immigrant groups
giving space to the nationals, both because their children are Brazilians
as well as the growing and expanded arrival of migrants.
The different cultural proposals, such as the Movement of the Week of
Modern Art of 22, and those that resulted from it – those of nationalism
exalted or those of cultural action recovering the national, it seemsin having passed
off the Museum.
 Taunay chose to omit the political rivalries of regional groups;
armed conflicts – except for those that contributed to national unity; at
inequalities and social, ethnic and cultural differences, valuing the political as
instance of conflict resolution, selecting some individuals as heroes
highlighted, structuring a genealogical history of the colonization process and
occupation, with flexible chronological frameworks.
His view of history can be considered as arising from the
dominant in the Brazilian Historical and Geographical Institute at the end of the 19th century,
remembering that there were others that were opposed to it. And in the early decades of
twentieth century, different readings of Brazil were already being proposed and influencing
political practices.
In historiographical narratives, structured visually and materially
in the Paulista Museum and in the Republican Museum “Convenção de Itu”, do not appear
the abolitionist struggles, the slave revolts, the rebellions of the dominated Indians,
the regional conflicts of the imperial period, the stormy and conflicted years of
nascent Republic, the struggles between monarchists and republicans, the social shocks
between republicans and populations marginalized by the political process and
economic, political disputes between groups that led to the formation of
dissidence and movements of revolt, the constant states of siege. Not even
transformations brought about by the 1930 Revolution, with the prohibition of
regional formal.
16. Demographics
estimated for 1910; from the 1920 census and
1940, corrected. Source:
Statistical Yearbook
IBGE Rio de Janeiro:
FIBGE, 1990.
There are also no debates on national identity,
burning theme since the second decade of the 20th century in literary manifestations,
political and educational – mainly in the State of São Paulo, with its
large immigrant population or descendants – which gave rise to a long
nationalization policy (BITTENCOURT, 1990; GLEZER, 1999).
It is symptomatic that, having taken over the Museum in 1917, the year of the most
long strike in the city of São Paulo in the First Republic, with urban life
disturbed, with the intensification of social conflicts, in an industrial and working-class neighborhood,
with a strong contingent of immigrant origin, there is no reference
to such events in his narrative.
In Taunay's long term as director, from 1917 to 1945, the context
international law changed – from one world war to another, with the entry of
new political and economic actors, new technological and cultural means.
The story told at the Museu Paulista is one of hierarchy, of courage
of individualized heroes, of building the Nation. were selected the
objects worthy of participating in the national memory. And the visual elements –
sculptures, paintings, portraits, coats of arms were created under strict guidance.
How these became the images of national history deserves studies, which
will certainly enrich knowledge about identity formation
national.
From the creation of “tradition” and “representation” emerged a history
materialized national conservative, which is reproduced in the thousands of books
didactic and non-didactic history throughout the country.
And it is very disturbing that the definition of the Museu Paulista in the 1990s
of the 20th century as a Museum of the History of Material Culture, a matrix concept
anthropological and archaeological - contrary to the original proposal of its definer
– has, over the years, reinforced the conservative and elitist aspect of the
expository narrative and in the relationship with the public, reifying the documents, using them in a decontextualized way and not presenting them as a social construction,
contrary to contemporary theoretical discussions (GATHERCOL and
LOWENTHAL, 2001).
The current Museum
It is surprising that, in our days, at the beginning of the 21st century, despite
of all criticisms and proposals for transforming the Museum's museological profile
Paulista – which eventually could have gone as far as dismantling the scenery
museum, with serious and evident damage to the architecture and art of the building – and the
new forms of action proposed, such as the exploration of material culture,
iconography, and relationships with the visual arts, always up to date with the world
international museum, it is not yet a museum for the citizen, in which
Brazilian citizens, of all ethnic and social groups that collaborated
for the formation of Brazilian society can meet and recognize,
perceiving the cultural heritage as theirs and not “their” of others.
Hundreds of visitors, simple people, with no intellectual profile, express
often the discomfort they feel - but they are only the ones who sustain the
public institutions. There is no information on the contribution of populations
indigenous peoples, Afro-Brazilians, immigrants, workers, migrants and
workers in general in Brazilian training. social, class, and
of gender, age, ethnicity, is notare present in the exhibition area in a way
clear.
And being located in a neighborhood of occupation and later urbanization
to the construction of the Museum, which serves as an identity element for the residents,
who was an industrialist and a worker, growing up alongside the railroad, with a
an outstanding urban project, with an avenue connecting the city center to the
of Independence, nothing in it indicates such a relationship; and the transformations why
passed and passed, nothing to report...
Objects originating from the richest strata of society are still
predominate in the collection and in the exhibitions, without explanation, reinforcing the traditional
national social structuring, and the image of a palatial residence, an elite house.
The museum that was structured by a spokesperson for the São Paulo elite
conservative, to shape a national identity from the placement of the
performance of the political elite, identifying a historical trajectory of the formation of the
nation as the only one possible, and hiding all other voices, is still the
dominant at the beginning of the 21st century. There is no critical presentation of the content –
structure in space today – which is observed by the public.
At the Museu Paulista, in both buildings, social actors
presented are those of the elite. From the elite to the elite – it may be a nice motto, but
is almost a cultural tragedy for contemporary society, which does not
finds support or explanation for what it sees, for the selection and arrangement criteria
are never made explicit.
The museological historiographical language is different from writing, a
intersection of different disciplines and artistic forms of communication, but
pseudo-sophistication cannot and must not cover up the social meaning of production.
There is no proposal for simulacra or false scenarios, but only an appeal to a
critical reflection on the society that exists and in which everyone – institution and people
we are inserted; call for a more generous relationship with the public and with the
society of which we are all a part.
It is before society that the responsibility presents itself, because in
at some point it will question the preservation of cultural heritage; which
heritage is preserved; the quality of preservation, the image of society
which it transmits, to whom it represents.
Historians in the future will analyze what has been accomplished with
the instruments of his time, and how the relativity of scientific knowledge is
consensus, it is hoped that the judgment will not be drastic, and that the selections made
in the contemporary are read generously.
But it must always be borne in mind that just as the past
constructed can be questioned, the past kept unexplained also the
he can.
A museum for the future: a museum for the citizen
The Museu Paulista must prepare for the future, for its second
century of existence.
The images of the buildings, the sculptures, the paintings, the portraits, the objects
of the Museu Paulista collection are now part of the national social memory and not
only the educated.
Visitors from all over the country flock to see the Independence Museum
– image published in books, films, television documentaries, postcards,
and also memories of parents, grandparents, acquaintances...
In the same way, they flock to the Republican Museum to see the
past, materialized in portraits and tiles.
Even though the Paulista Museum is not the museum of
citizenship, in which we can all recognize ourselves as participants in the
construction of the national past, it plays a leading role in the imaginary
Brazilian social.
But the future awaits.
What are the proposals of Museu Paulista for its next 10 and
20 years? Besides more space, and more staff, what do you want?
Will he be able to preserve the cultural heritage he has received, give it
meaning and transform, or will it be just another 'memory space', without
social insertion? A beautiful monument with a beautiful collection for publicity..
Or will it be a museum for the Brazilian citizen, in which he can recognize himself and
integrate?
The future depends on the option that its professors choose: the reiteration
of social and political conservatism or the insertion in the issues that society
Brazilian is proposed.
The destruction of the Museu Paulista, as it is a constitutive element of the
myth of national identity, is not proposed. After all, there is no revolutionary situation
iconoclast on the horizon. But it is necessary to decide what the social role and
that it should exercise in the national culture. Work analytically and
critically this myth may be a relevant and significant task for the future, but
for this to occur, the relationship with historical and historiographical knowledge
must be established, and clear and critical action must be determined to
ward off the risks of social conservatism.